posts/Carbon Neutrality.md, before:

---
title: "Carbon Neutrality"
date: "2022-03-18"
excerpt: "The majority of greenhouse gases in the United States, like carbon dioxide, come from burning
fossil fuels for electricity, heat and transportation (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). They
cause climate change by trapping heat, and have far-ranging environmental and health effects
(National Geographic, Carbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here’s what you need to know.
Christina Nunez, 5/13/19). A simple way to help Our Mother Earth is to become carbon neutral."
cover_image: "/images/posts/Carbon Neutrality.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Mother Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

The majority of greenhouse gases in the United States, like carbon dioxide, come from burning
fossil fuels for electricity, heat and transportation (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). They
cause climate change by trapping heat, and have far-ranging environmental and health effects
(National Geographic, Carbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here’s what you need to know.
Christina Nunez, 5/13/19). A simple way to help Our Mother Earth is to become carbon neutral.

What is carbon neutral? Daniel Poynter from Carbon Neutral Indiana says, “Every individual and
organization has a carbon footprint, and this is the amount of GHGs they release annually. A
person or thing is carbon neutral when it does not add GHGs to the atmosphere. Carbon
neutrality means being net-neutral (i.e. the entity still emits some GHGs, but it takes
responsibility for its carbon footprint and cleans up its “carbon trash.”) How? It invests
financially in projects that soak up the same amount it emits (e.g. a tree-planting project or a
landfill-methane-capture project).”

There are very few carbon-neutral organizations in the country, and CNI is the only one in
Indiana. Their mission is to help households and businesses clean up their carbon footprints and
shift culture so that it’s normal to be carbon neutral. They are a non-profit 501-c-3 organization.
Working with CNI or any other reliable carbon-neutral organization, members can attain carbon
neutrality by cleaning up their carbon trash. By doing so, people make a big difference in the
climate crisis. Becoming carbon neutral allows people to do something positive rather than do
nothing. It also helps us become part of the solution rather than part of the problem. Carbon
neutral is especially important when we consider that Indiana is ranked eighth in carbon dioxide
emissions in the country (World Atlas, US States by Carbon Dioxide Emissions per Capita,
Amber Pariona, 4/25/17).

You may consider contacting CNI or any other reliable carbon-neutral organization for help in
becoming carbon neutral. The former uses a carbon calculator developed by the University of
Califonia, Berkeley. From your responses in a short phone interview, they can calculate your
carbon sequestration (carbon captured) on your property compared with carbon released.

CNI and other carbon-neutral organizations can reduce global warming and climate change by
investing, for example, in preserving existing forests; reforestation; development of more
grasslands and wetlands; improvements in agriculture practices; reduction of methane from
landfills; and more. For example, CNI reported helping in 2020:

- 200+ people measure their carbon footprints
- 160+ households and businesses become carbon neutral
- Clean-up 5,000+ tons of CO2e (annualized), like taking 1,000 cars off the road forever
- Prevent over $1.1 million in social damages.

Therefore, it is in our best interest to become carbon neutral and then be proactive in other ways
to improve air quality. It will help protect Our Mother Earth now and for future generations.

Other ways of helping Our Mother Earth are to consider putting into practice the 10 Ways
Dioceses Care for God’s Creation by Jonathon Braden (1/3/22, Laudato Si’ Movement), and the
52 Ways to Care for Creation by Pedro Jimenez (12/22/21, Laudato Si’ Movement).

## What can we do? Please visit:

- https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/greenhouse-gases
- https://www.carbonneutralindiana.org/
- https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/us-states-by-carbon-dioxide-emissions-per-capita.html
- https://laudatosimovement.org/2022/01/03/10-ways-care-creation-dioceses/
- https://laudatosimovement.org/2021/12/22/52-ways-to-care-for-creation-en-news/

“It is our collective and individual responsibility…to preserve and tend to the world in which we
all live” (Dalai Lama, Nobel Laureate 1989). Pray and thank God for all our blessings, and
become carbon neutral.

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on March 18th, 2022.

Commit message:

Improvements to SEO, Search Function, and added Categories
There was a lot implemented in this update. The biggest feature was the
implementation of the Action Plan Categories that are accessible on the
articles page. This allows posts to have their own categories and can
filter posts using the category links. In addition, added new highlighting
when typing in the search input to give a better search experience for the
user. Lastly, added a lot of SEO improvements like robot.txt, meta tags,
favicons, and page titles. Still need to clean up code in a refactoring
session and add a categories description.

posts/Carbon Neutrality.md, after:

---
title: "Carbon Neutrality"
date: "2022-03-18"
excerpt: "The majority of greenhouse gases in the United States, like carbon dioxide, come from burning
fossil fuels for electricity, heat and transportation (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). They
cause climate change by trapping heat, and have far-ranging environmental and health effects
(National Geographic, Carbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here’s what you need to know.
Christina Nunez, 5/13/19). A simple way to help Our Mother Earth is to become carbon neutral."
category: "Cry of the Earth"
cover_image: "/images/posts/Carbon Neutrality.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Planet Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

The majority of greenhouse gases in the United States, like carbon dioxide, come from burning
fossil fuels for electricity, heat and transportation (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). They
cause climate change by trapping heat, and have far-ranging environmental and health effects
(National Geographic, Carbon dioxide levels are at a record high. Here’s what you need to know.
Christina Nunez, 5/13/19). A simple way to help Our Mother Earth is to become carbon neutral.

What is carbon neutral? Daniel Poynter from Carbon Neutral Indiana says, “Every individual and
organization has a carbon footprint, and this is the amount of GHGs they release annually. A
person or thing is carbon neutral when it does not add GHGs to the atmosphere. Carbon
neutrality means being net-neutral (i.e. the entity still emits some GHGs, but it takes
responsibility for its carbon footprint and cleans up its “carbon trash.”) How? It invests
financially in projects that soak up the same amount it emits (e.g. a tree-planting project or a
landfill-methane-capture project).”

There are very few carbon-neutral organizations in the country, and CNI is the only one in
Indiana. Their mission is to help households and businesses clean up their carbon footprints and
shift culture so that it’s normal to be carbon neutral. They are a non-profit 501-c-3 organization.
Working with CNI or any other reliable carbon-neutral organization, members can attain carbon
neutrality by cleaning up their carbon trash. By doing so, people make a big difference in the
climate crisis. Becoming carbon neutral allows people to do something positive rather than do
nothing. It also helps us become part of the solution rather than part of the problem. Carbon
neutral is especially important when we consider that Indiana is ranked eighth in carbon dioxide
emissions in the country (World Atlas, US States by Carbon Dioxide Emissions per Capita,
Amber Pariona, 4/25/17).

You may consider contacting CNI or any other reliable carbon-neutral organization for help in
becoming carbon neutral. The former uses a carbon calculator developed by the University of
Califonia, Berkeley. From your responses in a short phone interview, they can calculate your
carbon sequestration (carbon captured) on your property compared with carbon released.

CNI and other carbon-neutral organizations can reduce global warming and climate change by
investing, for example, in preserving existing forests; reforestation; development of more
grasslands and wetlands; improvements in agriculture practices; reduction of methane from
landfills; and more. For example, CNI reported helping in 2020:

- 200+ people measure their carbon footprints
- 160+ households and businesses become carbon neutral
- Clean-up 5,000+ tons of CO2e (annualized), like taking 1,000 cars off the road forever
- Prevent over $1.1 million in social damages.

Therefore, it is in our best interest to become carbon neutral and then be proactive in other ways
to improve air quality. It will help protect Our Mother Earth now and for future generations.

Other ways of helping Our Mother Earth are to consider putting into practice the 10 Ways
Dioceses Care for God’s Creation by Jonathon Braden (1/3/22, Laudato Si’ Movement), and the
52 Ways to Care for Creation by Pedro Jimenez (12/22/21, Laudato Si’ Movement).

## What can we do? Please visit:

- https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/greenhouse-gases
- https://www.carbonneutralindiana.org/
- https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/us-states-by-carbon-dioxide-emissions-per-capita.html
- https://laudatosimovement.org/2022/01/03/10-ways-care-creation-dioceses/
- https://laudatosimovement.org/2021/12/22/52-ways-to-care-for-creation-en-news/

“It is our collective and individual responsibility…to preserve and tend to the world in which we
all live” (Dalai Lama, Nobel Laureate 1989). Pray and thank God for all our blessings, and
become carbon neutral.

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on March 18th, 2022.
