posts/Pope Francis calls us to action on ecological issues.md, before:

---
title: "Pope Francis Calls Us to Action on Ecological Issues"
date: "2021-05-14"
excerpt: "
Did you know that, on May 24, 2015, Pope Francis signed an encyclical called “Laudato Si’ –
On Care for our Common Home?” Five years later, he announced an Anniversary Year from
May 24, 2020, to May 24, 2021, where he encourages a new way of living. During this
Anniversary Year, Pope Francis established seven public commitment groups and seven platform
goals."
cover_image: "/images/posts/Pope Francis calls us to action on ecological issues.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Mother Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

Did you know that, on May 24, 2015, Pope Francis signed an encyclical called “Laudato Si’ –
On Care for our Common Home?” Five years later, he announced an Anniversary Year from
May 24, 2020, to May 24, 2021, where he encourages a new way of living. During this
Anniversary Year, Pope Francis established seven public commitment groups and seven platform
goals.

This “grassroots effort” addresses worldwide ecological issues important for today and for future
generations. At the end of the Anniversary Year, the Vatican office invites the Church to
Laudato Si’ Week, to be held May 16-24, 2021. Laudato Si’ Week is a time to reflect on what
the pandemic has taught us, and motivate us ― to help Our Mother Earth together.

Pope Francis’ seven commitment groups are:

1. Families
2. Dioceses
3. Schools
4. Universities/colleges
5. Hospitals/health care centers
6. Businesses/farms
7. Religious orders/provinces.

Each commitment group has the same seven platform goals assigned to them. These are
described below as taken generally from the pope’s Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human
Development.

**1. Cry of the Earth** – Our response includes the use of clean renewable energy sources to
achieve carbon neutrality. In addition, it promotes biodiversity, clean water, clean air, and
healthy soils.

**2. Cry of the Poor** – Our response embraces protecting human life from conception to
death, and protecting all life on Earth, especially vulnerable groups.

**3. Ecological Economics** – Our response addresses fair-trade policies, sustainable
production of products, ethical use of resources and investments, and the removal of any
economic activities harmful to the planet and to its people.

**4. Simple Lifestyles** – Our response praises living a more thoughtful, considerate and
simpler lifestyle related to the use of natural resources and energy. It also advocates
adopting a more plant-based diet, greater use of public transportation, and not polluting
our water, air and soil.

**5. Ecological Education** – Our response directs us to rethink and redesign educational
curriculum and our schools, and create more ecological awareness, action, and vocations.

**6. Ecological Spirituality** – Our response emphasizes God’s creation, encourages more
contact with nature, promotes creation-centered liturgical celebrations, and develops
more opportunities for ecological catechesis, prayer, retreats, and formation.

**7. Emphasis on Community Involvement and Participatory Action** – Our response
emphasizes “care for creation” at the local, regional, national and international levels.

To implement these goals, Pope Francis will invite a certain group(s) to begin their 7-year
journey in the first year. In subsequent years, he will encourage new groups to being their
journeys. Progress is expected to be exponential, and outstanding awards in each group are
planned. Let’s join Pope Francis in “addressing his seven platform goals.”

There is much to do, as described in the websites below from the Vatican; Tri-State Creation
Care; Catholic Climate Covenant; and Global Goals for Sustainable Development. The simple
question is: What platform goal(s) will you accomplish first?

## What can we do?

- Visit: https://www.humandevelopment.va/en/news/2020/laudato-si-special-anniversary-year-plan.html
- Visit: https://www.ncronline.org/news/earthbeat/vatican-office-invites-church-journey-total-sustainability-next-decade
- Visit: catholicclimatecovenant.org, https://www.facebook.com/tristatecreationcare/, and
  https://www.globalgoals.org/
- As a committed group of creation care advocates, let’s act together now to develop action
  plans for each of the platform goals, and hold ourselves accountable by evaluating our
  performance each year.
- To accomplish planned goals, mankind throughout the world needs to accept each other
  and their cultures, and help each other ― in dealing with worldwide issues!

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on May 14th, 2021.

Commit message:

Improvements to SEO, Search Function, and added Categories
There was a lot implemented in this update. The biggest feature was the
implementation of the Action Plan Categories that are accessible on the
articles page. This allows posts to have their own categories and can
filter posts using the category links. In addition, added new highlighting
when typing in the search input to give a better search experience for the
user. Lastly, added a lot of SEO improvements like robot.txt, meta tags,
favicons, and page titles. Still need to clean up code in a refactoring
session and add a categories description.

posts/Pope Francis calls us to action on ecological issues.md, after:

---
title: "Pope Francis Calls Us to Action on Ecological Issues"
date: "2021-05-14"
excerpt: "
Did you know that, on May 24, 2015, Pope Francis signed an encyclical called “Laudato Si’ –
On Care for our Common Home?” Five years later, he announced an Anniversary Year from
May 24, 2020, to May 24, 2021, where he encourages a new way of living. During this
Anniversary Year, Pope Francis established seven public commitment groups and seven platform
goals."
category: "Cry of the Poor"
cover_image: "/images/posts/Pope Francis calls us to action on ecological issues.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Planet Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

Did you know that, on May 24, 2015, Pope Francis signed an encyclical called “Laudato Si’ –
On Care for our Common Home?” Five years later, he announced an Anniversary Year from
May 24, 2020, to May 24, 2021, where he encourages a new way of living. During this
Anniversary Year, Pope Francis established seven public commitment groups and seven platform
goals.

This “grassroots effort” addresses worldwide ecological issues important for today and for future
generations. At the end of the Anniversary Year, the Vatican office invites the Church to
Laudato Si’ Week, to be held May 16-24, 2021. Laudato Si’ Week is a time to reflect on what
the pandemic has taught us, and motivate us ― to help Our Mother Earth together.

Pope Francis’ seven commitment groups are:

1. Families
2. Dioceses
3. Schools
4. Universities/colleges
5. Hospitals/health care centers
6. Businesses/farms
7. Religious orders/provinces.

Each commitment group has the same seven platform goals assigned to them. These are
described below as taken generally from the pope’s Dicastery for Promoting Integral Human
Development.

**1. Cry of the Earth** – Our response includes the use of clean renewable energy sources to
achieve carbon neutrality. In addition, it promotes biodiversity, clean water, clean air, and
healthy soils.

**2. Cry of the Poor** – Our response embraces protecting human life from conception to
death, and protecting all life on Earth, especially vulnerable groups.

**3. Ecological Economics** – Our response addresses fair-trade policies, sustainable
production of products, ethical use of resources and investments, and the removal of any
economic activities harmful to the planet and to its people.

**4. Simple Lifestyles** – Our response praises living a more thoughtful, considerate and
simpler lifestyle related to the use of natural resources and energy. It also advocates
adopting a more plant-based diet, greater use of public transportation, and not polluting
our water, air and soil.

**5. Ecological Education** – Our response directs us to rethink and redesign educational
curriculum and our schools, and create more ecological awareness, action, and vocations.

**6. Ecological Spirituality** – Our response emphasizes God’s creation, encourages more
contact with nature, promotes creation-centered liturgical celebrations, and develops
more opportunities for ecological catechesis, prayer, retreats, and formation.

**7. Emphasis on Community Involvement and Participatory Action** – Our response
emphasizes “care for creation” at the local, regional, national and international levels.

To implement these goals, Pope Francis will invite a certain group(s) to begin their 7-year
journey in the first year. In subsequent years, he will encourage new groups to being their
journeys. Progress is expected to be exponential, and outstanding awards in each group are
planned. Let’s join Pope Francis in “addressing his seven platform goals.”

There is much to do, as described in the websites below from the Vatican; Tri-State Creation
Care; Catholic Climate Covenant; and Global Goals for Sustainable Development. The simple
question is: What platform goal(s) will you accomplish first?

## What can we do?

- Visit: https://www.humandevelopment.va/en/news/2020/laudato-si-special-anniversary-year-plan.html
- Visit: https://www.ncronline.org/news/earthbeat/vatican-office-invites-church-journey-total-sustainability-next-decade
- Visit: catholicclimatecovenant.org, https://www.facebook.com/tristatecreationcare/, and
  https://www.globalgoals.org/
- As a committed group of creation care advocates, let’s act together now to develop action
  plans for each of the platform goals, and hold ourselves accountable by evaluating our
  performance each year.
- To accomplish planned goals, mankind throughout the world needs to accept each other
  and their cultures, and help each other ― in dealing with worldwide issues!

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on May 14th, 2021.
