posts/Save the Dirt.md, before:

---
title: "Save the Dirt"
date: "2022-06-24"
excerpt: "Dave Hudak, a former Field Office Supervisor for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, showed
great wisdom when he’d say, “Save the dirt.” He was really saying, “Save the soil.” If you give
life to the soil and make it healthy, you’ll resolve many land, water and air issues. An excellent
article is, “The Soil is Alive, Protecting Soil Biodiversity across Europe” (European
Commission, 5/22/08). Soils with high biodiversity can be noisy (Ute Eberle, 2/9/22, Life in the
soil was thought to be silent. What if it isn’t? Living World). Franklin D. Roosevelt said, “A
nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.”"
cover_image: "/images/posts/Save the Dirt.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Mother Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

Dave Hudak, a former Field Office Supervisor for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, showed
great wisdom when he’d say, “Save the dirt.” He was really saying, “Save the soil.” If you give
life to the soil and make it healthy, you’ll resolve many land, water and air issues. An excellent
article is, “The Soil is Alive, Protecting Soil Biodiversity across Europe” (European
Commission, 5/22/08). Soils with high biodiversity can be noisy (Ute Eberle, 2/9/22, Life in the
soil was thought to be silent. What if it isn’t? Living World). Franklin D. Roosevelt said, “A
nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.”

Our goal is to remove carbon from the atmosphere and increase it in the soil. An article that
describes common soil issues is, “Can Dirt Save the Earth?” by Moises Velasquez-Manoff
(4/18/18, The New York Times), which reported, “The world is warming not only because fossil
fuels are being burned, but also because soils, forests and wetlands are being ravaged.” In this
article, we learn about soil health and the benefits of compost. It also said, “Society could
theoretically remove carbon from the atmosphere and store it in the earth, and at the same time
enhance the fortunes of farmers and the overall stability of the nation’s food supply.” By
focusing on soil health, one farmer reduced his herbicide use 75% and fertilizers 45%; found that
mulch and cover crops prevented weeds from growing; and he didn’t use insecticides. These
successes suggest farmers can increase carbon in the soil while actually reducing their overall
expenses.

In California, local governments will make compost more accessible for farmers, helping them
retain water in soils; fight droughts; boost soil health; and reduce methane from being released
into the atmosphere. Compared to carbon dioxide, methane is 80 times more potent as a
greenhouse gas (“California gears up for a new composting law to cut methane emissions and
enrich soil,” Grace van Deelen, 6/1/2022, Politics and Policy). Another helpful article is the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s special report on climate change, desertification,
land degradation, food security, sustainable land management, and greenhouse gas fluxes in
terrestrial ecosystems.

Just think how great it would be to have healthy soils that:

- promote deeper roots in the ground throughout the year for more CO 2 sequestration;
- hold more water to reduce flooding and run-off of agro-chemicals;
- have cover crops to protect against erosion from wind and rain; and
- have super-improved habitat for soil fauna and flora.

Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension in New Jersey also studied soil health. It found leaf
mulching helped soil health, and that it could easily be integrated into any crop-production
system with proper planning and management. Through partnerships with local municipalities,
agriculture can help solve a leaf problem that affects cities/towns. Leaf mulching can improve
on-farm income, reduce municipal disposal costs, reduce soil erosion and increase the
productivity of farms (Daniel Kluchinski et al., 3/1996, USDA-NRCS, “On-Farm Leaf
Mulching: Effects on Soils, Crop Yield, and Pests”).

## What can we do? Please Visit:

- https://ec.europa.eu/environment/archives/soil/pdf/handouts_bonn.pdf
- https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/18/magazine/dirt-save-earth-carbon-farming-climate-change.html
- https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/

“... if this is to be a permanent nation, we must save this most indispensable of all our God-given
assets － the soil from which comes our food and raiment (clothing). If we fail in this, remember
that, much sooner than we have expected, this will be a nation of subsoil (i.e. below topsoil)
farmers.” - H.H. Bennett 1933 (Father of Soil Conservation).

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on June 24th, 2022.

Commit message:

Improvements to SEO, Search Function, and added Categories
There was a lot implemented in this update. The biggest feature was the
implementation of the Action Plan Categories that are accessible on the
articles page. This allows posts to have their own categories and can
filter posts using the category links. In addition, added new highlighting
when typing in the search input to give a better search experience for the
user. Lastly, added a lot of SEO improvements like robot.txt, meta tags,
favicons, and page titles. Still need to clean up code in a refactoring
session and add a categories description.

posts/Save the Dirt.md, after:

---
title: "Save the Dirt"
date: "2022-06-24"
excerpt: "Dave Hudak, a former Field Office Supervisor for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, showed
great wisdom when he’d say, “Save the dirt.” He was really saying, “Save the soil.” If you give
life to the soil and make it healthy, you’ll resolve many land, water and air issues. An excellent
article is, “The Soil is Alive, Protecting Soil Biodiversity across Europe” (European
Commission, 5/22/08). Soils with high biodiversity can be noisy (Ute Eberle, 2/9/22, Life in the
soil was thought to be silent. What if it isn’t? Living World). Franklin D. Roosevelt said, “A
nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.”"
category: "Cry of the Earth"
cover_image: "/images/posts/Save the Dirt.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Planet Earth**

**Editor’s note:**
_This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for Our Common
Home, Laudato Si’ and his 2021 Platform Goals._

Dave Hudak, a former Field Office Supervisor for the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, showed
great wisdom when he’d say, “Save the dirt.” He was really saying, “Save the soil.” If you give
life to the soil and make it healthy, you’ll resolve many land, water and air issues. An excellent
article is, “The Soil is Alive, Protecting Soil Biodiversity across Europe” (European
Commission, 5/22/08). Soils with high biodiversity can be noisy (Ute Eberle, 2/9/22, Life in the
soil was thought to be silent. What if it isn’t? Living World). Franklin D. Roosevelt said, “A
nation that destroys its soil, destroys itself.”

Our goal is to remove carbon from the atmosphere and increase it in the soil. An article that
describes common soil issues is, “Can Dirt Save the Earth?” by Moises Velasquez-Manoff
(4/18/18, The New York Times), which reported, “The world is warming not only because fossil
fuels are being burned, but also because soils, forests and wetlands are being ravaged.” In this
article, we learn about soil health and the benefits of compost. It also said, “Society could
theoretically remove carbon from the atmosphere and store it in the earth, and at the same time
enhance the fortunes of farmers and the overall stability of the nation’s food supply.” By
focusing on soil health, one farmer reduced his herbicide use 75% and fertilizers 45%; found that
mulch and cover crops prevented weeds from growing; and he didn’t use insecticides. These
successes suggest farmers can increase carbon in the soil while actually reducing their overall
expenses.

In California, local governments will make compost more accessible for farmers, helping them
retain water in soils; fight droughts; boost soil health; and reduce methane from being released
into the atmosphere. Compared to carbon dioxide, methane is 80 times more potent as a
greenhouse gas (“California gears up for a new composting law to cut methane emissions and
enrich soil,” Grace van Deelen, 6/1/2022, Politics and Policy). Another helpful article is the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s special report on climate change, desertification,
land degradation, food security, sustainable land management, and greenhouse gas fluxes in
terrestrial ecosystems.

Just think how great it would be to have healthy soils that:

- promote deeper roots in the ground throughout the year for more CO 2 sequestration;
- hold more water to reduce flooding and run-off of agro-chemicals;
- have cover crops to protect against erosion from wind and rain; and
- have super-improved habitat for soil fauna and flora.

Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension in New Jersey also studied soil health. It found leaf
mulching helped soil health, and that it could easily be integrated into any crop-production
system with proper planning and management. Through partnerships with local municipalities,
agriculture can help solve a leaf problem that affects cities/towns. Leaf mulching can improve
on-farm income, reduce municipal disposal costs, reduce soil erosion and increase the
productivity of farms (Daniel Kluchinski et al., 3/1996, USDA-NRCS, “On-Farm Leaf
Mulching: Effects on Soils, Crop Yield, and Pests”).

## What can we do? Please Visit:

- https://ec.europa.eu/environment/archives/soil/pdf/handouts_bonn.pdf
- https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/18/magazine/dirt-save-earth-carbon-farming-climate-change.html
- https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/

“... if this is to be a permanent nation, we must save this most indispensable of all our God-given
assets － the soil from which comes our food and raiment (clothing). If we fail in this, remember
that, much sooner than we have expected, this will be a nation of subsoil (i.e. below topsoil)
farmers.” - H.H. Bennett 1933 (Father of Soil Conservation).

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on June 24th, 2022.
