posts/The importance of biodiversity.md, before:

---
title: "The Importance of Biodiversity"
date: "2021-03-12" 
excerpt: "
Did you know many animals and plants are becoming extinct in the world, due to
overpopulation, overcrowding, and overconsumption? All species on Earth are gifts from God,
and biodiversity holds a treasure of genes that can offer many possibilities, especially since
“humans are more at risk from diseases as biodiversity disappears” (John Platt, 12/7/10,
Scientific American). So, we urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1:
Loss of Biodiversity."
cover_image: "/images/posts/The importance of biodiversity.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Mother Earth**

**Editor’s note:** _This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for
Our Common Home, Laudato Si’_

Did you know many animals and plants are becoming extinct in the world, due to
overpopulation, overcrowding, and overconsumption? All species on Earth are gifts from God,
and biodiversity holds a treasure of genes that can offer many possibilities, especially since
“humans are more at risk from diseases as biodiversity disappears” (John Platt, 12/7/10,
Scientific American). So, we urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1:
Loss of Biodiversity.

Biodiversity is so important! Ecologically, it refers to all life found on Earth, and how it interacts
in a balanced way in different ecosystems. Rich biodiversity provides us with clean air to breathe,
clean water to drink, healthy soils, pollination in plants, pest control, wastewater treatment and
much more. Just like our bodies need to be balanced―so too―do our ecosystems.

However, biodiversity is affected by chemicals, deforestation, and isolating populations caused
by development, infrastructure, and even noise and light pollution. Examples of high biodiverse
areas are uncut forests, wetlands, prairies, mangrove swamps and rainforests. We need these
places to flourish and grow, but this can only happen if we all get involved. We simply need
ecosystems to be diverse and flourish throughout the world!

The bald eagle first gained federal protection in 1940. It was on the federally endangered species
list because of the insecticide DDT. This chemical got into the food chain by killing insects; fish
ate these tainted insects; and eagles ate these contaminated fish. As a result, bio-accumulated
levels of DDT in eagles caused them to produce eggs with very thin shells that broke during
incubation, thus decreasing the number of offspring and their overall population. With DDT
banned in 1972, the number of bald eagles rebounded enough to be removed from the federally
endangered species list. Peregrine falcons and ospreys followed a similar story.

Biodiversity can also be affected by forest fragmentation or the splitting of large, connected
forests into smaller forests. Fragmentation affects forest interior birds, like many federal and
state listed warblers. Increasing edge habitat reduces the interior forest habitat. Introducing new
species into a new environment is harmful and can cause an invasive species, like the
mosquitofish introduced for mosquito control, to outcompete a native species like the blackstripe
topminnow. Sutton, Zeiber and Fisher (Journal of Freshwater Ecology, January 2012, 28(1):1-16)
found the mosquitofish more aggressive, thus displacing blackstripe topminnows.

We also have many invasive plants like kudzu, Japanese knotweed, English ivy, winter creeper,
bush honeysuckle, Autumn olive, Bradford pear, purple loosestrife and oriental bittersweet that
outcompete native species. What about the emerald ash borer and its effect on our forests; and
before that, the gypsy moth; and since 2006, the millions of bats (a beneficial species to
humankind) that have died from the white-nose syndrome (Pseudogymnoascus destructans)?

Our oceans need protection too, especially the coral reefs, since “more than 90 percent of the
warming that happened on Earth from 1971-2010 occurred in the ocean” (LuAnn Dahlman and
Rebecca Lindsey, 8/17/20, Climate Change: Ocean Heat Content/NOAA Climate.gov). Many
coral reefs, which show high biodiversity, have been lost or degraded from water pollution,
thermal pollution, sedimentation and destructive fishing practices.

Caring for our Mother Earth requires far-sighted planning efforts. If habitats are affected,
mitigation (replacement) should be required, and let’s not forget, human communities are
responsible for protecting high biodiverse areas such as the Amazon and Congo basins, and the
great aquifers and glaciers. Pope Francis specifically calls these areas, the “lungs” of the planet.

## What can we do?

Please consider the following:

- Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Puv0Pss33M
- Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6Ua_zWDH6U
- Plant trees, flowerbeds, gardens, and landscape with food species (foodscaping).
- Stabilize river banks following approved guidelines, and implement two-stage ditches.
- Fund protection of high biodiverse areas in the world, including others planting and
  preserving trees.
- Emphasize healthy soils with roots in the ground all year (no-till farming), which absorb
  (sequester) carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into the soil, reducing global warming.

Let’s protect our native plants and animals!

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on March 12th, 2021

Commit message:

Improvements to SEO, Search Function, and added Categories
There was a lot implemented in this update. The biggest feature was the
implementation of the Action Plan Categories that are accessible on the
articles page. This allows posts to have their own categories and can
filter posts using the category links. In addition, added new highlighting
when typing in the search input to give a better search experience for the
user. Lastly, added a lot of SEO improvements like robot.txt, meta tags,
favicons, and page titles. Still need to clean up code in a refactoring
session and add a categories description.

posts/The importance of biodiversity.md, after:

---
title: "The Importance of Biodiversity"
date: "2021-03-12" 
excerpt: "
Did you know many animals and plants are becoming extinct in the world, due to
overpopulation, overcrowding, and overconsumption? All species on Earth are gifts from God,
and biodiversity holds a treasure of genes that can offer many possibilities, especially since
“humans are more at risk from diseases as biodiversity disappears” (John Platt, 12/7/10,
Scientific American). So, we urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1:
Loss of Biodiversity."
category: "Cry of the Earth"
cover_image: "/images/posts/The importance of biodiversity.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Planet Earth**

**Editor’s note:** _This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for
Our Common Home, Laudato Si’_

Did you know many animals and plants are becoming extinct in the world, due to
overpopulation, overcrowding, and overconsumption? All species on Earth are gifts from God,
and biodiversity holds a treasure of genes that can offer many possibilities, especially since
“humans are more at risk from diseases as biodiversity disappears” (John Platt, 12/7/10,
Scientific American). So, we urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1:
Loss of Biodiversity.

Biodiversity is so important! Ecologically, it refers to all life found on Earth, and how it interacts
in a balanced way in different ecosystems. Rich biodiversity provides us with clean air to breathe,
clean water to drink, healthy soils, pollination in plants, pest control, wastewater treatment and
much more. Just like our bodies need to be balanced―so too―do our ecosystems.

However, biodiversity is affected by chemicals, deforestation, and isolating populations caused
by development, infrastructure, and even noise and light pollution. Examples of high biodiverse
areas are uncut forests, wetlands, prairies, mangrove swamps and rainforests. We need these
places to flourish and grow, but this can only happen if we all get involved. We simply need
ecosystems to be diverse and flourish throughout the world!

The bald eagle first gained federal protection in 1940. It was on the federally endangered species
list because of the insecticide DDT. This chemical got into the food chain by killing insects; fish
ate these tainted insects; and eagles ate these contaminated fish. As a result, bio-accumulated
levels of DDT in eagles caused them to produce eggs with very thin shells that broke during
incubation, thus decreasing the number of offspring and their overall population. With DDT
banned in 1972, the number of bald eagles rebounded enough to be removed from the federally
endangered species list. Peregrine falcons and ospreys followed a similar story.

Biodiversity can also be affected by forest fragmentation or the splitting of large, connected
forests into smaller forests. Fragmentation affects forest interior birds, like many federal and
state listed warblers. Increasing edge habitat reduces the interior forest habitat. Introducing new
species into a new environment is harmful and can cause an invasive species, like the
mosquitofish introduced for mosquito control, to outcompete a native species like the blackstripe
topminnow. Sutton, Zeiber and Fisher (Journal of Freshwater Ecology, January 2012, 28(1):1-16)
found the mosquitofish more aggressive, thus displacing blackstripe topminnows.

We also have many invasive plants like kudzu, Japanese knotweed, English ivy, winter creeper,
bush honeysuckle, Autumn olive, Bradford pear, purple loosestrife and oriental bittersweet that
outcompete native species. What about the emerald ash borer and its effect on our forests; and
before that, the gypsy moth; and since 2006, the millions of bats (a beneficial species to
humankind) that have died from the white-nose syndrome (Pseudogymnoascus destructans)?

Our oceans need protection too, especially the coral reefs, since “more than 90 percent of the
warming that happened on Earth from 1971-2010 occurred in the ocean” (LuAnn Dahlman and
Rebecca Lindsey, 8/17/20, Climate Change: Ocean Heat Content/NOAA Climate.gov). Many
coral reefs, which show high biodiversity, have been lost or degraded from water pollution,
thermal pollution, sedimentation and destructive fishing practices.

Caring for our Mother Earth requires far-sighted planning efforts. If habitats are affected,
mitigation (replacement) should be required, and let’s not forget, human communities are
responsible for protecting high biodiverse areas such as the Amazon and Congo basins, and the
great aquifers and glaciers. Pope Francis specifically calls these areas, the “lungs” of the planet.

## What can we do?

Please consider the following:

- Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Puv0Pss33M
- Visit: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b6Ua_zWDH6U
- Plant trees, flowerbeds, gardens, and landscape with food species (foodscaping).
- Stabilize river banks following approved guidelines, and implement two-stage ditches.
- Fund protection of high biodiverse areas in the world, including others planting and
  preserving trees.
- Emphasize healthy soils with roots in the ground all year (no-till farming), which absorb
  (sequester) carbon dioxide from the atmosphere into the soil, reducing global warming.

Let’s protect our native plants and animals!

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on March 12th, 2021
