posts/Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World.md, before:

---
title: "Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World"
date: "2021-02-19"
excerpt: "
Did you know about 60% of our bodies are comprised of water, and there is only 3% freshwater
on Earth? Without clean drinking water, we cannot survive. Polluted water can cause cancer,
lead poisoning and many diseases. So why are our waterways and oceans being polluted? We
urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1: The Issue of Water. Our Mother
Earth needs our help in stopping water unbalances, water shortages, and water pollution."
cover_image: "/images/posts/Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Mother Earth**

**Editor’s note:** _This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for
Our Common Home, Laudato Si’_

Did you know about 60% of our bodies are comprised of water, and there is only 3% freshwater
on Earth? Without clean drinking water, we cannot survive. Polluted water can cause cancer,
lead poisoning and many diseases. So why are our waterways and oceans being polluted? We
urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1: The Issue of Water. Our Mother
Earth needs our help in stopping water unbalances, water shortages, and water pollution.

Water unbalances include above-average rainfall causing floods in some areas and below-
average rainfall causing droughts in others. Water shortages include a depletion of
groundwater; in some coastal areas, groundwater too salty to drink; and acidification in streams
and springs from mining, making them lifeless and ruined. Water pollution in streams could
include dumping trash, tires, carcasses and appliances; while in our oceans and on beaches,
pollution by oil spills and contaminants, and red tides (harmful algal blooms). Even our
emissions into the air produce acid rain.

Let’s talk about rain! During a rainstorm, rainwater washes contaminants from impervious
surfaces (e.g., roofs, roads, parking lots) and directs water into drains. This prevents much of the
water from penetrating into the ground and recharging groundwater. And if a city has a
combined sewer system, there could be overcapacity causing raw sewage to enter a waterway.
As water rises, it erodes banks, taking precious soil downstream.

Here are some ideas! Promote green infrastructure such as greenways, green spaces (parks),
green roofs, wetlands, prairies, temperate forests and rainforests. These habitats maintain
groundwater levels, reduce erosion, and capture carbon dioxide. If we maintain water balances
and stop pollution, we can focus on purifying our water.

“As recently as 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency named the Ohio River as one of
the country&#39;s most polluted. Industrial contaminants, including the “forever chemical”
perfluorooctanoic acid, have been detected ….” (April Johnston, November 15, 2019 in Energy
and Environment, ‘That’s Vinegar’: The Ohio River’s History of Contamination and Progress).
Nonetheless, municipalities along its course treat this water following the Safe Drinking Water
Act (1974), where USEPA sets legal limits for many contaminants. Other watchdogs of the Ohio
River are the Army Corp of Engineers and the Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission.

Additional water-treatment methods include wetlands and two-stage ditches. An excellent
constructed wetland for wastewater treatment is the 27-acre wetland designed to remove
combined sewage overflow water from Hawkins Creek (Washington, Indiana). An excellent
two-stage ditch is Shatto Ditch (Kosciusko County, Indiana) which was built to reduce nutrient
run-off into streams from farms. Groundwater protection in limestone areas may include limiting
development, and “No Spray Zones” along roadways.

Overall, water is fascinating and life giving! Water can be a solid, liquid, or gas. Water is polar
and cohesive, making it an excellent solvent with a high heat capacity and high heat of
vaporization. And most importantly — it keeps us all healthy and alive! There’s never been a
better time than now to use our water-quality wisdom to ensure a greener and healthier future!

## What can we do?

Please consider the following:

- Visit: https://www.houzz.com/magazine/11-ways-to-save-water-at-home-stsetivw-vs~32374403
- Visit: https://feedbackloopsclimate.com/
- Keep aquatic ecosystems clean, and promote Riverwatch and Adopt-A-Stream programs.
- Promote downtown development that includes more permeable surfaces and green infrastructure.

**Interesting Facts:** Did you know “one adult saltwater oyster can filter up to 50 gallons of water
per day?” says Erin Koenig (22 January 2018, In Oceanus - Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, Can Clams and Oysters Help Cleanup Waterways). Andrea Bennett reports (17 July
2014, In The EPA Blog, Our Friends, the Freshwater Mussels), “one adult freshwater mussel can
filter up to 15 gallons of water per day. Mussels filter out pollution from our drinking-water
sources. A 6-mile stretch of mussel beds can remove over 25 tons of particulates per year!”

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on February 19th, 2021.

Commit message:

Improvements to SEO, Search Function, and added Categories
There was a lot implemented in this update. The biggest feature was the
implementation of the Action Plan Categories that are accessible on the
articles page. This allows posts to have their own categories and can
filter posts using the category links. In addition, added new highlighting
when typing in the search input to give a better search experience for the
user. Lastly, added a lot of SEO improvements like robot.txt, meta tags,
favicons, and page titles. Still need to clean up code in a refactoring
session and add a categories description.

posts/Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World.md, after:

---
title: "Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World"
date: "2021-02-19"
excerpt: "
Did you know about 60% of our bodies are comprised of water, and there is only 3% freshwater
on Earth? Without clean drinking water, we cannot survive. Polluted water can cause cancer,
lead poisoning and many diseases. So why are our waterways and oceans being polluted? We
urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1: The Issue of Water. Our Mother
Earth needs our help in stopping water unbalances, water shortages, and water pollution."
category: "Cry of the Earth"
cover_image: "/images/posts/Water Quality Wisdom and Our Commitment for a Greener and Healthier World.jpg"
---

Deacon Tom Cervone, Ph.D., Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C., and Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed.M.S.

**Our Planet Earth**

**Editor’s note:** _This series takes a deeper look at Pope Francis’ 2015 encyclical ― On Care for
Our Common Home, Laudato Si’_

Did you know about 60% of our bodies are comprised of water, and there is only 3% freshwater
on Earth? Without clean drinking water, we cannot survive. Polluted water can cause cancer,
lead poisoning and many diseases. So why are our waterways and oceans being polluted? We
urge you to take to heart Pope Francis’ wisdom in his Chapter 1: The Issue of Water. Our Mother
Earth needs our help in stopping water unbalances, water shortages, and water pollution.

Water unbalances include above-average rainfall causing floods in some areas and below-
average rainfall causing droughts in others. Water shortages include a depletion of
groundwater; in some coastal areas, groundwater too salty to drink; and acidification in streams
and springs from mining, making them lifeless and ruined. Water pollution in streams could
include dumping trash, tires, carcasses and appliances; while in our oceans and on beaches,
pollution by oil spills and contaminants, and red tides (harmful algal blooms). Even our
emissions into the air produce acid rain.

Let’s talk about rain! During a rainstorm, rainwater washes contaminants from impervious
surfaces (e.g., roofs, roads, parking lots) and directs water into drains. This prevents much of the
water from penetrating into the ground and recharging groundwater. And if a city has a
combined sewer system, there could be overcapacity causing raw sewage to enter a waterway.
As water rises, it erodes banks, taking precious soil downstream.

Here are some ideas! Promote green infrastructure such as greenways, green spaces (parks),
green roofs, wetlands, prairies, temperate forests and rainforests. These habitats maintain
groundwater levels, reduce erosion, and capture carbon dioxide. If we maintain water balances
and stop pollution, we can focus on purifying our water.

“As recently as 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency named the Ohio River as one of
the country&#39;s most polluted. Industrial contaminants, including the “forever chemical”
perfluorooctanoic acid, have been detected ….” (April Johnston, November 15, 2019 in Energy
and Environment, ‘That’s Vinegar’: The Ohio River’s History of Contamination and Progress).
Nonetheless, municipalities along its course treat this water following the Safe Drinking Water
Act (1974), where USEPA sets legal limits for many contaminants. Other watchdogs of the Ohio
River are the Army Corp of Engineers and the Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission.

Additional water-treatment methods include wetlands and two-stage ditches. An excellent
constructed wetland for wastewater treatment is the 27-acre wetland designed to remove
combined sewage overflow water from Hawkins Creek (Washington, Indiana). An excellent
two-stage ditch is Shatto Ditch (Kosciusko County, Indiana) which was built to reduce nutrient
run-off into streams from farms. Groundwater protection in limestone areas may include limiting
development, and “No Spray Zones” along roadways.

Overall, water is fascinating and life giving! Water can be a solid, liquid, or gas. Water is polar
and cohesive, making it an excellent solvent with a high heat capacity and high heat of
vaporization. And most importantly — it keeps us all healthy and alive! There’s never been a
better time than now to use our water-quality wisdom to ensure a greener and healthier future!

## What can we do?

Please consider the following:

- Visit: https://www.houzz.com/magazine/11-ways-to-save-water-at-home-stsetivw-vs~32374403
- Visit: https://feedbackloopsclimate.com/
- Keep aquatic ecosystems clean, and promote Riverwatch and Adopt-A-Stream programs.
- Promote downtown development that includes more permeable surfaces and green infrastructure.

**Interesting Facts:** Did you know “one adult saltwater oyster can filter up to 50 gallons of water
per day?” says Erin Koenig (22 January 2018, In Oceanus - Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, Can Clams and Oysters Help Cleanup Waterways). Andrea Bennett reports (17 July
2014, In The EPA Blog, Our Friends, the Freshwater Mussels), “one adult freshwater mussel can
filter up to 15 gallons of water per day. Mussels filter out pollution from our drinking-water
sources. A 6-mile stretch of mussel beds can remove over 25 tons of particulates per year!”

_Dr. Tom Cervone is a deacon at Holy Redeemer Catholic Church in Evansville, Indiana with 50
years of experience in ecology. He graduated from St. Bonaventure University, a Franciscan
University. His email is tcervone@evdio.org. Sister Maureen Houlihan, D.C. is a support sister
on the Seton Harvest Farm started by the Daughters of Charity in response to the Communities -
Care of Mother Earth. This CSA (Community Supported Agriculture) Farm grows all natural
produce for shareholders and the poor. Nicole Cervone-Gish, Ed. MS. is an award winning ELL
(English Language Learner) teacher, who lives in Evansville, Indiana with her family._

Originally printed in [The Message](https://evdiomessage.org/) on February 19th, 2021.
